Metadata Extraction Leveraging Large Language Models
Cuize Han∗
Sesh Jalagam∗
chan@box.com
sjalagam@box.com
Box AI Platform
Redwood City, California, USA
Abstract
The advent of Large Language Models has revolutionized tasks
across domains, including the automation of legal document anal-
ysis—a critical component of modern contract management sys-
tems. This paper presents a comprehensive implementation of LLM-
enhanced metadata extraction for contract review, focusing on the
automatic detection and annotation of salient legal clauses. Lever-
aging both the publicly available Contract Understanding Atticus
Dataset (CUAD) and proprietary contract datasets, our work demon-
strates the integration of advanced LLM methodologies with practi-
cal applications. We identify three pivotal elements for optimizing
metadata extraction: robust text conversion, strategic chunk selec-
tion, and advanced LLM-specific techniques, including Chain of
Thought (CoT) prompting and structured tool calling. The results
from our experiments highlight the substantial improvements in
clause identification accuracy and efficiency. Our approach shows
promise in reducing the time and cost associated with contract re-
view while maintaining high accuracy in legal clause identification.
The results suggest that carefully optimized LLM systems could
serve as valuable tools for legal professionals, potentially increasing
access to efficient contract review services for organizations of all
sizes.
CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Retrieval models and ranking;•
Computing methodologies → Information extraction;•Ap-
plied computing→Law, social and behavioral sciences.
Keywords
Metadata Extraction, LLM, Chunk re-ranking, OCR, Chain of Thought
ACM Reference Format:
Cuize Han and Sesh Jalagam. 2025. Metadata Extraction Leveraging Large
Language Models. In.ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA
©2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
1.1 Metadata Extraction
Metadata extraction is the automated process of identifying and ex-
tracting structured information from unstructured or semi-structured
documents. In today’s digital age, this task has become increasingly
critical, particularly in legal and enterprise applications. Automated
clause extraction and analysis from legal contracts has become in-
creasingly critical in modern legal practice, where law firms spend
approximately 50% of their time on contract review [5]. This task
involves identifying and extracting structured information such as
governing law clauses, termination provisions, and liability terms
from complex legal documents. With billing rates for lawyers at
large law firms typically ranging from $500-$900 per hour in the
US [5], manual contract review creates substantial costs for orga-
nizations. Furthermore, the prohibitive cost of legal review means
many small businesses and individuals often sign contracts without
thorough analysis, potentially exposing themselves to unfavorable
terms [18]. In the legal domain, automatic contract analysis re-
quires precise extraction of key elements such as parties involved,
effective dates, termination clauses, and financial terms [14]. This
automation not only accelerates contract review processes but also
reduces human error and enables large-scale contract analytics
[13].
Beyond legal applications, metadata extraction serves as a funda-
mental building block for various enterprise document management
tasks. For instance, organizations can automatically classify docu-
ments based on their security levels by extracting and analyzing
specific metadata fields [10]. This capability is crucial for maintain-
ing compliance with data protection regulations and implementing
proper access controls. Furthermore, metadata extraction facilitates
efficient document retrieval, content organization, and workflow
automation across different business units [4].
1.2 Large Language Models
Large Language Models (LLMs) represent a significant advancement
in natural language processing, characterized by their ability to
understand and generate human-like text through massive-scale
pre-training on diverse datasets [8]. These models, such as GPT-4,
Claude, and Gemini, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
various language understanding and generation tasks [2].
For metadata extraction, LLMs offer unique advantages over
traditional rule-based or specialized machine learning approaches.
Their deep contextual understanding enables them to accurately
identify relevant information even when it appears in varying for-
mats or requires complex reasoning. Importantly, our approach
arXiv:2510.19334v1  [stat.ML]  22 Oct 2025
Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA Cuize Han and Sesh Jalagam
does not involve fine-tuning LLMs specifically for metadata extrac-
tion tasks. Instead, we utilize LLMs as the final component in our
pipeline, where they analyze preprocessed text chunks and gen-
erate structured JSON outputs containing the extracted metadata.
This architecture offers several key benefits:
• Flexibility to experiment with and switch between different
LLM providers.
• Ability to leverage continuous improvements in base models
without retraining.
•Reduced dependency on task-specific training data.
•Enhanced maintainability and adaptability of the system.
1.3 Related Works
Previous research in metadata extraction can be broadly categorized
into several approaches:
Traditional Rule-based Systems: Early works relied heavily on
regular expressions and predefined patterns [ 16], which proved
brittle when faced with document variations.
Machine Learning Approaches: Researchers have explored vari-
ous ML techniques including:
Conditional Random Fields (CRF) for sequence labeling [15],
Deep learning models specifically trained for extraction tasks
[7],
Transformer-based approaches with fine-tuning [6].
LLM Integration: Recent work has begun exploring the use of
LLMs for extraction [11].
Our Contributions: Based on our research and experimentation,
we make the following key contributions:
A comprehensive framework for metadata extraction that ef-
fectively combines text preprocessing, chunk selection, and LLM-
based extraction Novel techniques for optimal chunk selection
that maximize extraction accuracy while minimizing LLM token
usage Empirical evaluation of various LLM prompting strategies,
including Chain of Thought (CoT) and structured output gener-
ation Extensive experimentation on both proprietary and public
datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness and generalizability of our
approach Practical insights into implementing and scaling metadata
extraction systems in enterprise environments
2 Metadata Extraction Workflow
Figure 1: Simplified workflow of metadata extraction
Figure 1 presents a comprehensive overview of our metadata
extraction system. The pipeline begins with an input document
(typically in PDF format) and produces structured metadata output
in JSON format, with optional quality assessment through LLM-
based grading. Through extensive experimentation and deployment
experience, we have identified three critical components that signif-
icantly impact both the quality and operational costs of metadata
extraction: (1) text conversion and OCR preprocessing, (2) strategic
chunk selection, and (3) LLM-based summarization and structuring.
While emerging multi-modal LLMs offer the possibility of direct
metadata extraction from document images, our experiments in-
dicate that this approach currently incurs prohibitively high costs
for production deployment. Instead, our system employs a more
efficient pipeline approach, with each component optimized for
its specific task. The system also incorporates an innovative on-
line grading mechanism using LLMs to assess extraction quality,
enabling continuous monitoring and quality assurance.
In the following subsections, we examine each key component
in detail, discussing their implementation, challenges, and our so-
lutions for optimizing their performance. We also present empir-
ical evidence demonstrating how these components collectively
contribute to achieving high-quality metadata extraction while
maintaining practical operational costs.
2.1 Text conversion and OCR
Text conversion and Optical Character Recognition (OCR) serve as
the crucial first step in our metadata extraction pipeline. This com-
ponent transforms various document formats, particularly PDFs,
into machine-readable text while preserving essential structural
information such as layout and formatting. The quality of this con-
version directly impacts all subsequent steps in the pipeline, making
it a fundamental determinant of the overall extraction accuracy.
For metadata extraction tasks, high-quality text conversion is
particularly important for several reasons. First, accurate text ex-
traction ensures that key information remains intact and properly
sequenced, which is essential for LLMs to understand the document
context correctly. Second, proper handling of document structure
helps maintain the relationship between different metadata ele-
ments, such as associating values with their corresponding fields.
Third, poor text conversion can introduce artifacts or errors that
may confuse LLMs or lead to incorrect metadata extraction. We
conducted a comprehensive evaluation of various text conversion
and OCR solutions, including both open-source and commercial
options:
•Evisort [3]
•Azure Document Intelligence (azure-md) [1]
•Unstructured-IO (unstructured-md) [17]
•Apryse OCR
•Apache Tika
•pdftotext
Our evaluation maintained a consistent LLM summarization
configuration across all conversion methods to isolate the impact
of text conversion quality. Based on extensive testing with our
internal dataset, we selected Azure Document Intelligence as our
primary conversion solution. This choice was driven by its optimal
balance between conversion quality and operational costs. The
detailed comparative analysis and performance metrics of different
Metadata Extraction Leveraging Large Language Models Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA
conversion methods are presented in section 3.2 of our experimental
results.
2.2 Chunk Selection
Chunk selection is the process of identifying and extracting rel-
evant portions of text from a document for metadata extraction.
Despite the continuing expansion of LLMs’ context windows, strate-
gic chunk selection remains crucial for both improving extraction
quality and optimizing operational costs. This component acts as
an intelligent filter, ensuring that only the most relevant document
segments are processed by the LLMs.
The importance of effective chunk selection extends beyond mere
cost efficiency. Our experiments on the Contract Understanding
Atticus Dataset (CUAD) demonstrate that smaller, well-selected
context windows can actually outperform larger context windows
using the same LLM. This counter-intuitive finding suggests that
providing LLMs with more focused, relevant context can lead to
more accurate metadata extraction than processing larger portions
of text. The detailed results of these experiments are presented in
section 3.3 .
Traditional chunk selection approaches, such as dense retrieval
and cosine similarity-based methods, typically treat the document
as a generic text corpus without considering the unique character-
istics of metadata extraction tasks. These methods fail to leverage
crucial structural information, including metadata field keys, de-
scriptions, and expected value types. To address these limitations,
we developed two novel techniques:
• NER-enhanced Boosting: This technique incorporates Named
Entity Recognition to identify and prioritize chunks contain-
ing entities relevant to the target metadata fields.
• Model-based Chunk Re-ranking: We implement a special-
ized re-ranking mechanism that considers both the structural
aspects of the document and the specific requirements of
each metadata field type.
2.2.1 NER and Borda Re-ranking.A key challenge in metadata
extraction is ensuring that chunks containing essential informa-
tion for each field are selected, particularly when dealing with
large documents and complex metadata templates. We present
NER-enhanced Boosting with Borda Re-ranking [ 9], a novel ap-
proach that combines named entity recognition with sophisticated
scoring mechanisms to improve chunk selection quality. The input
for structured metadata extraction consists of a template defining
multiple fields, each specified by a dictionary containing the field’s
key name, description, and optional type information (e.g., integer,
string, enum, multiSelect). We augment this template by mapping
fields to relevant entity labels from SpaCy’s 18 pre-defined classes
(e.g., DATE, EVENT, LAW). This mapping is determined through
cosine similarity between field descriptions and entity label defini-
tions. For each chunk in the document, we compute four distinct
scores:
• Per-field Score: Cosine similarity between individual field
information and chunk text
• Total-field Score: Cosine similarity between the aggregated
template information and chunk text
• Per-field NER Score: Normalized count of named entities
in the chunk matching the field’s assigned entity labels
• Total-field NER Score: Normalized count of all relevant
named entities in the chunk
These scores are combined using Borda re-ranking with tunable
weights to create a final ranking. Our algorithm ensures coverage by
maintaining a minimum percentage threshold of important chunks
per field within the selected context window. This approach ad-
dresses a critical limitation of traditional cosine similarity-based se-
lection, which can overlook chunks containing crucial field-specific
information, especially in larger documents with numerous meta-
data fields. One concrete template example:
"{
"fields": [
{
"key": "Parties",
"prompt": "List the parties who signed the contract.
This usually contains names of organizations or individuals.",
"type": "array",
"ner_labels": [
"PERSON",
"ORG"
]
},
{
"key": "Effective Date",
"prompt": "Specify the date when the contract becomes
effective.",
"type": "date",
"ner_labels": [
"DATE"
]
},
{
"key": "Most Favored Nation",
"prompt": "Is there a clause ensuring the parties
get the best terms offered to any third party?",
"type": “enum”,
"options": [
{
"key": "Yes"
},
{
"key": "No"
}
]
} ] }"
For fields like "Parties, " our method ensures chunks containing
relevant organization or person entities receive boosted scores,
increasing their likelihood of selection. Similarly, chunks containing
date entities are prioritized for date-related fields like "Effective
Date. " The combination of NER-enhanced boosting and Borda re-
ranking significantly improves both precision and recall of chunk
selection, leading to better extraction quality in our experiments.
Detailed performance comparisons with baseline approaches are
presented in section 3.3.
Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA Cuize Han and Sesh Jalagam
Figure 2: Neural network re-ranking model
2.2.2 Model-based Chunk Re-ranking.Building upon the NER-
enhanced Borda re-ranking approach, we developed a more so-
phisticated model-based chunk re-ranker that learns to predict the
relevance of chunks for specific metadata fields. This approach of-
fers two key advantages: (1) the ability to incorporate richer features
through automatic feature engineering, and (2) the capacity to learn
complex weight structures that surpass the linear combinations
used in Borda voting.
Our model takes three inputs: the complete metadata template
prompt, a specific field from the template, and a chunk of text. These
inputs are featurized into numerical vectors that capture various
aspects of their relationships and content. To maintain practical
utility in production environments, we designed the model to be
lightweight, minimizing both computational cost and latency.
To develop and validate this approach, we first established a per-
formance ceiling through oracle experiments on the CUAD dataset.
These experiments demonstrated that perfect chunk ranking could
achieve an F1 score of 0.94, indicating significant potential for im-
provement over baseline methods. Guided by these results, we
experimented with several model architectures, ultimately develop-
ing a neural network classifier that directly processes embeddings
and additional features, see figure 2.
The model incorporates multiple feature types:
• Embedding-based features: Cosine similarities between chunk
and field representations
•Text-based features: BM25 similarity scores
•Linguistic features: NER and POS tag-based features
• Structural features: Chunk position and length information
This model-based approach achieved significant improvements
over baseline methods on CUAD dataset:
• With an 8192-token context window: F1 score of 0.80 (vs.
0.75 baseline)
• With a 4096-token context window: F1 score of 0.76 (vs. 0.66
baseline)
The performance gains were particularly pronounced with smaller
context windows, highlighting the model’s efficiency in identify-
ing the most relevant chunks. Detailed experimental results and
ablation studies are presented in section 3.3.
2.3 LLM-based Information Synthesis
2.3.1 Chain of Thought Prompting.The effectiveness of LLMs in
metadata extraction heavily depends on prompt engineering. Be-
yond basic prompting guidelines such as clear instructions and con-
sistent formatting, we found that Chain of Thought (CoT) prompt-
ing significantly improves extraction accuracy, particularly for
fields requiring logical reasoning or complex calculations.
CoT prompting instructs the LLM to break down its reasoning
process into explicit steps before providing the final answer. This
step-by-step reasoning proves particularly valuable for:
•Date calculations involving fiscal years or complex terms
• Financial calculations (e.g., payment schedules with com-
pound terms)
• Conditional clauses where multiple sections need to be con-
sidered together
• Cross-referencing between different parts of the document
and fields
While CoT prompting increases token usage and processing
time, its benefits extend beyond improved accuracy. The detailed
reasoning chains have helped us identify and correct annotation
errors in both the CUAD dataset and our internal dataset, leading
to better quality data.
2.3.2 Structured Output through Tool Calling.Tool calling (or func-
tion calling) [ 12] capabilities of modern LLMs provide a robust
mechanism for ensuring structured output format. By defining a
JSON schema that specifies the expected structure and type con-
straints for each metadata field, we leverage the LLM’s tool calling
interface to enforce consistent output formatting. Example tool
definition:
{
"name": "extract_metadata",
"parameters": {
"type": "object",
"properties": {
"document_name": {"type": "string"},
"effective_date": {"type": "string", "format": "date"},
"parties": {
"type": "array",
"items": {"type": "string"}
}
},
"required": ["document_name", "effective_date", "parties"]
}
}
Metadata Extraction Leveraging Large Language Models Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA
This approach offers several advantages including reduced for-
mat errors in LLM outputs, type validation at extraction time, im-
proved extraction accuracy through structured constraints and
better handling of null or missing values. Our experiments show
that tool calling not only improves output consistency but also
enhances overall extraction quality, likely because the structured
format helps guide the LLM’s reasoning process.
3 Experiments
Our primary evaluation metric is the average F1 score across all
documents and fields. For each document and field, we calculate
precision as # correct extracted values / # extracted values, recall as
# correct extracted values / # correct values and define the F1 score
as usual: 2 * (precision * recall) / (precision + recall). It handles cases
where either true values or extracted values are arrays.
3.1 Datasets
We evaluate our approach using two distinct datasets. The first is
the Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset (CUAD)[5], a public
benchmark dataset for contract analysis that encompasses a wide
variety of contract types and metadata fields. It consists of over
500 contracts, each carefully labeled by legal experts to identify 41
different types of important clauses, for a total of more than 13,000
annotations. We focused on the 8 categories that are more aligned
with the metadata extraction task including Document Name, Par-
ties, Agreement Date, Effective Date, Expriation Date, Notice to
Terminate Renewal and Governing Law. We used CUAD both for
training our reranking models and for evaluation purposes. To as-
sess the generalization capability of our approach, we also employ
an internal dataset consisting of lease contracts with more than
40 fields for extraction, which provides complementary evaluation
scenarios and helps validate the robustness of our methods across
different document types.
3.2 OCR and Text Conversion
Figure 3: Count of extracted fields
Our evaluation of text conversion methods revealed significant
variations in performance across different approaches. Using our
Table 1: Result on CUAD dataset
Chunk Selection Context Window Model Name F1 Score
Oracle 4096 Text-Unicorn 0.94
Baseline 4096 Text-Unicorn 0.66
NER Boosting 4096 Text-Unicorn 0.74
Chunk Reranker 4096 Text-Unicorn 0.76
Baseline 8192 Text-Unicorn 0.75
Chunk Reranker 8192 Text-Unicorn 0.80
Baseline 64000 Claude 3.5 Sonnet 0.77
NER Boosting 8192 Claude 3.5 Sonnet 0.80
Oracle 16000 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.90
Chunk Reranker 16000 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.82
Table 2: Result on internal lease dataset
Chunk Selection Context Window Model Name F1 Score
Baseline 16000 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.36
NER Boosting 16000 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.40
Chunk Reranker 16000 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.43
internal contract dataset, we conducted a systematic comparison of
multiple text conversion solutions, including Azure Document Intel-
ligence, Unstructured-IO, Apryse OCR, and others. The comparison
maintained consistent LLM configurations across all conversion
methods to isolate the impact of text conversion quality. The re-
sults, visualized in Figure 1, demonstrate that Azure Document
Intelligence (azure-md) consistently achieves the highest number
of successfully extracted fields across different LLM backends. This
superior performance, combined with its reasonable operational
costs, led to our selection of Azure Document Intelligence as the
primary conversion solution in our pipeline.
3.3 Chunk Selection
To establish a theoretical performance ceiling for chunk selec-
tion strategies, we first conducted oracle chunk ranking experi-
ments. In these experiments, we augmented each field’s prompt
with its corresponding ground truth value, creating what we term
theoracle_prompt_per_field. The oracle ranking score for each
chunk was then computed as the cosine similarity between the
embeddings of this augmented prompt and the chunk text. This
approach simulates perfect chunk selection by leveraging knowl-
edge of the correct extraction values, providing an upper bound on
potential performance.
The oracle experiments achieved remarkable results with an F1
score of 0.94, significantly outperforming current methods. This
performance gap motivated the development of our model-based
chunk ranking approach.
For training the chunk ranking model, we sampled 10% and 5%
of documents from the CUAD dataset for training and testing sets
respectively. The training data preparation involved several key
steps. First, we processed each document through our production
chunking pipeline to generate consistent chunk representations.
Each data point consisted of chunk text, chunk index, and file name.
We then performed a Cartesian product between these chunks and
Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA Cuize Han and Sesh Jalagam
the extraction template fields, followed by joining with ground
truth data to establish training targets. The feature set for each
chunk-field pair included pre-computed embeddings and their co-
sine similarities, BM25 similarity scores, and linguistic features
derived from Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Part-of-Speech
(POS) tagging.
Our model-based approach demonstrated substantial improve-
ments over baseline methods, particularly in constrained context
settings. With an 8192 token context window, the model achieved
an F1 score of 0.80 compared to baseline scores of 0.75. The im-
provement was even more pronounced with a 4096 token context
window, where the model-based approach achieved an F1 score of
0.76 versus the baseline’s 0.66.
To assess generalization capability, we evaluated the system on
our internal dataset which is more challenging as it has more than
40 fields to extract at once. We see similar improvement when we
switch chunk selection mechanisms with baseline to be 0.36, NER
boosing 0.40 and model-based reranker has F1 score 0.43.
The performance gap between the oracle chunk selection and the
current chunk re-ranker suggests that while our approach is effec-
tive, there remains room for improvement in model generalization.
These results indicate that exploring richer feature representations
and more sophisticated model architectures could yield further
performance gains, potentially closing the gap with oracle perfor-
mance.
3.4 LLM configurations
3.4.1 Chain of Thought prompting.As mentioned before, the CoT
prompt can significantly improve LLM’s ability in reasoning. Here
is a part of a concrete example where the LLM tries to extract the
end date of a contract in the internal dataset.
The document does not explicitly state an end date.
<thinking>
We can deduce that the end date would be
50 days after the effective date.
</thinking>
<thinking>
Calculate the end date by adding 50 days to February 2nd, 2024.
February 2nd, 2024 + 50 days = March 24th, 2024
</thinking>
<thinking>
We can confidently extract "End Date: March 24, 2024".
</thinking>
Clearly, CoT helped LLM to get the final correct value.
Figure 4: CoT experiment on the internal contract dataset
Table 3: Result on internal lease dataset using json tool
Json Tool Model Name F1 Score
Yes Claude 3.5 Sonnet 0.48
No Claude 3.5 Sonnet 0.39
Yes Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.36
No Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.36
Yes GPT-4o 0.42
No GPT-4o 0.40
Figure 4 compares the performance of different LLMs with and
without CoT prompting on an internal dataset consisting of 58 con-
tracts. In the baseline comparison without CoT, OpenAI’s gpt4o and
o1-preview model demonstrate strong performance across most
fields, with extraction rates above 90% for basic fields like Party
Names and Signatures. For fields requiring complex reasoning such
as Notice Period or Duration calculations, we observe notable vari-
ations. When CoT prompting is applied, Gemini Flash shows sub-
stantial improvements over its base version, particularly for fields
requiring multi-step reasoning.
These variations reflect the inherent complexity differences in
extracting different field types, from simple pattern matching to so-
phisticated reasoning about contract terms and conditions. Notably,
the strong performance of Gemini Flash with CoT prompting has
significant practical implications, as it offers substantially lower
per-token costs compared to other models. This cost advantage,
combined with its competitive extraction accuracy when using CoT
prompting, makes it an attractive option for large-scale deployment
in production environments where cost efficiency is crucial.
3.4.2 Structured Output through Tool Calling.Tool calling capabil-
ities in modern LLMs provide a mechanism for ensuring structured
output format. By defining a JSON schema that specifies the ex-
pected structure and type constraints for each metadata field, we
leverage the LLM’s tool calling interface to enforce consistent out-
put formatting.
To evaluate the impact of JSON tool calling, we conducted exper-
iments on our internal lease dataset, which presents a particularly
challenging extraction task with over 40 fields per document. Ta-
ble 3 presents the comparison of extraction performance with and
without JSON tool calling across different LLM models.
Metadata Extraction Leveraging Large Language Models Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA
Table 4: Match Percent Results on CUAD dataset
Grader v.s. Agent Grader v.s. GT Agent v.s. GT
All cases 86.3% 80.5% 73.3%
Hard cases 78.4% 76.6% 61.1%
Table 5: Extraction with Retries on CUAD dataset
Number of Retries Model Name F1 Score
0 Text-Unicorn 0.80
1 Text-Unicorn 0.81
0 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.82
1 Gemini 1.5 Flash 0.84
The results show that JSON tool calling’s effectiveness varies
across models. Claude 3.5 Sonnet demonstrates the most significant
improvement, with F1 score increasing from 0.39 to 0.48 when using
the JSON tool. GPT-4o shows a modest improvement from 0.40 to
0.42, while Gemini 1.5 Flash maintains consistent performance at
0.36 regardless of tool usage. The varying impact suggests that the
benefit of structured output constraints depends on the model’s
inherent capabilities in handling complex multi-field extraction
tasks.
These findings indicate that while JSON tool calling can enhance
extraction accuracy for some models, its effectiveness should be
evaluated on a model-specific basis, particularly for challenging
datasets with numerous fields. The substantial improvement ob-
served with Claude 3.5 Sonnet suggests that models with strong
systematic reasoning capabilities may benefit more from structured
output constraints.
4 LLM as A Judge
The final component of our system leverages LLMs in an evaluative
capacity, both for improving extraction quality and monitoring sys-
tem performance. We explore two distinct applications: using LLMs
to correct extraction errors and implementing online performance
monitoring.
4.1 Label correction
We developed a specialized LLM-based grading system that evalu-
ates and potentially corrects the outputs of our extraction agent.
The grading LLM receives the same input as the extraction agent (in-
cluding the document text and metadata template) plus the agent’s
extracted values. It produces two outputs: a numerical score be-
tween 0 and 1 for each field and corrected values where it identifies
potential errors.
Our experiments revealed an interesting phenomenon (see Ta-
ble 4): the grading LLM’s extracted values showed higher agreement
with ground truth than the original extraction agent’s outputs. On
comprehensive evaluation, the grading LLM achieved a 80.5% match
rate with ground truth compared to the agent’s 73.3% match rate.
This improvement was even more pronounced for challenging cases,
where the grading LLM achieved a 76.6% match rate compared to
the agent’s 61.1%.
This performance improvement can be attributed to the grad-
ing LLM’s advantage of working with pre-extracted candidates,
effectively converting the problem from open-ended extraction to
validation and correction. The grader’s performance suggests that
scrutinizing existing candidates may be cognitively easier than
identifying relevant information from scratch. This motivates us
to implement a retry mechanism when the system fails to extract
certain fields value in the first attempt. The already extracted val-
ues will be included in the retry and we see clear performance
improvement in the retried extraction results (Table 5).
4.2 Online grading
Figure 5: Online monitoring based on LLM grader
Due to privacy constraints, we cannot log user prompts or docu-
ments for direct performance evaluation. Instead, we leverage the
LLM grader for real-time performance monitoring. Our monitoring
system, as illustrated in Figure 5, provides a comprehensive view
of system performance through three key dashboards.
The first dashboard shows the overall extraction success rate,
currently at 82.1% across all document types. The second dash-
board displays the distribution of field types in extraction requests
over time. For instance, during the monitored period, DATE fields
constituted 27.7% of all extraction requests, followed by GPE (Geo-
Political Entity) fields at 21.5%, and MONEY-related fields at 17.5%.
This distribution insight helps us prioritize optimization efforts for
frequently requested field types.
The third dashboard presents extraction quality scores broken
down by field type. Our system demonstrates particularly strong
performance in extracting EVENT (100%), LANGUAGE (100%), and
PRODUCT (100%) fields, while showing lower accuracy for ORDI-
NAL (49.5%) fields. These quality metrics are computed by the LLM
grader based on the extraction agent’s outputs.
The monitoring framework described above provides crucial
insights into system behavior and user patterns while maintaining
strict privacy standards. By analyzing aggregate performance met-
rics and field type distributions, we gain a deep understanding of
both system capabilities and user requirements as they evolve over
time. These insights drive our optimization efforts and develop-
ment roadmap, enabling continuous system improvement through
anonymous, aggregated data.
All of this is achieved while maintaining strict user data privacy,
as the monitoring system operates on aggregate metrics and quality
scores rather than raw document content.
5 Conclusion and Future Works
In this paper, we presented a comprehensive approach to metadata
extraction using Large Language Models. Our work makes several
key contributions. First, we identified and optimized three critical
Submitted for Review, June 2025, Chicago, IL, USA Cuize Han and Sesh Jalagam
components that significantly impact extraction quality: text con-
version, chunk selection, and LLM-specific techniques. Through
extensive experimentation, we demonstrated that Azure Document
Intelligence provides optimal text conversion quality, while our
novel NER-enhanced Borda re-ranking method significantly im-
proves chunk selection accuracy. We also showed that Chain of
Thought prompting and structured tool calling enhance LLM per-
formance in metadata extraction tasks.
Second, we introduced an innovative LLM-based grading system
that serves dual purposes: improving extraction accuracy through
label correction and enabling privacy-preserving online perfor-
mance monitoring. This system achieved a 80.5% match rate with
ground truth, surpassing the base extraction agent’s performance
of 73.3%.
Despite these advances, several challenges remain for future
research. First, the inherent uncertainty in LLM outputs presents a
stability challenge. Even with temperature parameters set to zero,
we observe variations between runs that can affect reliability in pro-
duction environments. This suggests a need for robust uncertainty
quantification and mitigation strategies.
Second, while our current chunk selection approach shows promis-
ing results, there is potential for developing field-type-specific rank-
ing models. Different metadata fields (e.g., dates, monetary values,
legal clauses) may benefit from specialized selection strategies that
consider their unique characteristics and common document loca-
tions.
Text conversion quality remains a critical area for improvement.
We are currently collaborating with a specialized OCR company
to develop more advanced and cost-effective text conversion so-
lutions. Their specialized OCR models show promise in handling
complex document layouts and improving text extraction quality
while reducing operational costs.
Finally, we identified particular challenges in handling multi-
Select fields with numerous options. These fields often require
complex reasoning across multiple document sections and careful
consideration of multiple valid alternatives. Developing special-
ized techniques for such fields, perhaps incorporating hierarchical
reasoning or structured validation steps, represents a promising
direction for future research.
As legal AI systems continue to evolve, our work provides a foun-
dation for more accessible, efficient, and accurate contract review
tools that could significantly impact legal practice. While these sys-
tems are not meant to replace legal professionals, they can serve as
valuable tools to augment human expertise and democratize access
to contract review services.
References
[1] Azure. 2024. OCR - Optical Character Recognition. https://learn.microsoft.com/
en-us/azure/ai-services/computer-vision/overview-ocr Accessed: 2024-10-16.
[2] Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao
Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al . 2024. A survey on
evaluation of large language models.ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology15, 3 (2024), 1–45.
[3] Evisort. 2024. The global leader in AI-native contract intelligence solutions.
https://www.evisort.com/company/about
[4] David Haynes. 2004.Metadata for information management and retrieval. Vol. 1.
Facet publishing.
[5] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Anya Chen, and Spencer Ball. 2021. Cuad:
An expert-annotated nlp dataset for legal contract review.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.06268(2021).
[6] Moreno La Quatra and Luca Cagliero. 2022. Transformer-based highlights ex-
traction from scientific papers.Knowledge-Based Systems252 (2022), 109382.
[7] Runtao Liu, Liangcai Gao, Dong An, Zhuoren Jiang, and Zhi Tang. 2018. Auto-
matic document metadata extraction based on deep networks. InNatural Lan-
guage Processing and Chinese Computing: 6th CCF International Conference, NLPCC
2017, Dalian, China, November 8–12, 2017, Proceedings 6. Springer, 305–317.
[8] Shervin Minaee, Tomas Mikolov, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam Chenaghlu, Richard
Socher, Xavier Amatriain, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. Large language models: A
survey.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06196(2024).
[9] Donald G Saari. 1985.The optimal ranking method is the Borda Count. Technical
Report. Discussion paper.
[10] Naseer Ahmed Sajid, Munir Ahmad, Atta-ur Rahman, Gohar Zaman, Mo-
hammed Salih Ahmed, Nehad Ibrahim, Mohammed Imran B Ahmed, Gomathi
Krishnasamy, Reem Alzaher, Mariam Alkharraa, et al. 2023. A Novel Metadata
Based Multi-Label Document Classification Technique.Computer Systems Science
& Engineering46, 2 (2023).
[11] Jaromir Savelka. 2023. Unlocking practical applications in legal domain: Evalua-
tion of gpt for zero-shot semantic annotation of legal texts. InProceedings of the
Nineteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law. 447–451.
[12] Zhuocheng Shen. 2024. Llm with tools: A survey.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18807
(2024).
[13] Amin Sleimi, Nicolas Sannier, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel Briand, Marcello Ceci,
and John Dann. 2021. An automated framework for the extraction of semantic
legal metadata from legal texts.Empirical Software Engineering26 (2021), 1–50.
[14] Amin Sleimi, Nicolas Sannier, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel Briand, and John
Dann. 2018. Automated extraction of semantic legal metadata using natural
language processing. In2018 IEEE 26th International Requirements Engineering
Conference (RE). IEEE, 124–135.
[15] Alan Souza, Viviane Moreira, and Carlos Heuser. 2014. ARCTIC: metadata
extraction from scientific papers in pdf using two-layer CRF. InProceedings of
the 2014 ACM symposium on document engineering. 121–130.
[16] Xiaoyu Tang, Qingtian Zeng, Tingting Cui, and Zeze Wu. 2010. Regular
expression-based reference metadata extraction from the web. In2010 IEEE 2nd
Symposium on Web Society. IEEE, 346–350.
[17] Unstrctured.io. 2024. Unstructured-IO / unstructured. https://github.com/
Unstructured-IO/unstructured
[18] upcounsel. 2024. What Happens if You Sign a Contract Without Reading? https:
//www.upcounsel.com/signing-contract-without-understanding Accessed: 2024-
11-11.